All right.
So now that we've gotten an in-depth understanding of Swift protocols and delegates, it's time to work
on the heart of the problem of this Clima app which is to work with APIs, so that we can fetch live weather
data from across the internet.
Firstly, what is an API?
Well, it stands for Application Programming Interface. And the official definition is that you can consider
it as a set of commands functions, protocols, and objects. And APIs can be used to create software or to
interact with an external system.
And the beauty of an API is that it provides developers with standard commands for performing common
operations so they don't have to write the code from scratch.
Now, we've already been using APIs when we've been creating iOS apps, we've been using the APIs that
Apple has created.
And these are types of APIs that you would use to create software,
right?
So whenever we went to the docs, we've been getting hold of the API reference. And when we're working
with these classes that Apple has created, for example, the AVAudioPlayer, then these are the standard
commands for performing common operations, such as playing a sound.
Now, in addition to the API that are used to create software,
there are also APIs which are used to interact with an external system.
So, for example, if you've ever seen in the Tinder app where they have this section called Shared Friends
or Shared Interests, where do they get this data from.
Well, when you log into Tinder using your Facebook account, Tinder actually ask Facebook for this data
so that they can populate it into their app.
So effectively, you can consider an API as simply just a contract.
It's the contract between the developer and the API provider.
So for example, when we're building our weather app, because we need to populate our app with live weather
data for all locations across the world, we're going to be using OpenWeather Maps API that they provide.
And in this case, by using the API, we're effectively entering in a contract where we say that we'll use
the methods that you provide and we'll abide by the rules that you set out in your API docs. And in return,
you'll promise to keep all of your requirements the same so that our app doesn't crash because you've
changed something.
So in this case, we have our app and we have the API provider. And what our app is going to do is it's
going to use the API.
And when the user types in a city name in our app, we're going to pass that city name to OpenWeather
using the API that they have set out for formatting this request, and then OpenWeather in response is
going to send us the live weather data, so that we can use it in our app.
So if you head over to openweathermap.org/api, you can take a look at the documentation for
the API that they provide.
So you can get things such as the current weather data, the hourly forecast, the 16 day / daily forecast,
and a whole bunch of other things as well.
Now, because they are responsible for hosting the data, keeping it updated, they have to make sure that
people don't abuse this service.
So very often these open APIs will ask you to sign up for an API key, and that key is going to uniquely
identify you as a developer.
So the first thing that we need to do to work with the API is if it requires an API key, such as
OpenWeather Map, then we have to sign up. And it's completely free and they don't need any credit card details.
They just want you to create a new account there. Once you signed up, then you should be able to see a
page that looks like this. And you should head over to this section called API keys. And here you should
be able to see your custom API key that will allow you to use this API service.
Go ahead and copy your API key and keep it somewhere safe.
And now we're going to see how we can use this API service. So the data that I want is the current weather
data.
So I'm going to go ahead and click here to take a look at the documentation.
You can see that you can get the current weather data for a location by the city name, by the city ID,
by geographic coordinates with latitude and longitude, by ZIP code, and a whole bunch of other things
that you can read about.
Now, in our case, we want to get the weather for a particular city name.
So if we go ahead and take a look at their example API calls, you can see that the city name comes after
this parameter called queue, and then you also have to supply what's called an app ID, and this is your
API key that we got just now.
So let's try and structure this API call using our own API key.
So first things first, let's go ahead and copy this API call.
So it's api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather, and then we have a question
mark,
and the question mark denotes the beginning of the queries.
So these are the queries that you're sending to open weather map.
And it's a bit like the inputs to our Swift functions.
We have to have a name or a parameter name.
So in this case "q" denotes the city name.
And then we have an equal sign and then we pass in the name of the city that we want to check the weather
for.
So let's go ahead and copy this and we're going to paste it into our browser. And I'm going to delete
the part where it says city name in brackets because I'm actually going to put the actual name of the
city that I'm interested in.
So London. Now that I've got my query as London, if I go ahead and hit enter,
you'll see I get an error. And it says, "Invalid API key. Please see this address for more information."
So once we take a look at this address, you'll see that the problem is because I haven't added in my
API key. So I've registered it,
I've copied it, but I now have to put it into my query. Ss you can see in the sample query,
there is a parameter name called "appid," and after the equals sign, you have to put in your app ID
that you got by registering with OpenWeather Map.
Let's head over to our URL and let's start off our list of parameters or inputs with the question
mark,
and then let's add the name of the parameter which is appid all in lowercase, and then equal sign, and then
we're going to paste in the appid that we got from OpenWeather Map under the API key section. And
then after that, we're going to tag on another parameter or another input.
So we're going to use the ampersand to signify that we're done with this app ID parameter input and
we're now going to add the "q" parameter which is going to denote the city name. And after the equals sign,
I'm going to put in the name the city that I'm interested in which is London.
And now if I hit enter, you'll see that I'm getting live data as of this moment right now,
what is the weather in London. So cloudy,
as usual. Now, if you're not getting this data back, it might be because your app ID or your API key
hasn't yet been activated.
It usually takes them a couple of hours to do this.
So it might be worth coming back and trying it the next day.
But for me, it often takes about five to ten minutes before they actually activate my key so it might
be worth getting a cup of tea and coming back to try it again later.
Now, the second thing you might be wondering is when you're seeing this data come back, you probably won't
be seeing it in this pretty sort of tree structure instead.
You'd probably be looking at the data that's coming back that looks like this.
Now, in order to get it turn into a tree structure which is much easier for us to be able to see and
understand as humans, then I recommend getting this free Chrome extension called JSON View Awesome.
And once you install it and activate it, then it will automatically detect when you're getting JSON
formatted data and it will formatted correctly for you.
So now that we've seen that we can structure our API call by adding our different parameters after the
URL separated by ampersands, and with the sort of key value kind of format where we have the name of
the parameter, an equal sign, and the value that we're sending over to the API provider.
So as a challenge, I want you to take a look at the API docs for getting the current weather data. Because
you might notice that in the data that we're getting back, the temperature for London is
293.
So don't worry, I'm not actually burning right now.
This is not the temperature in Celsius or Fahrenheit, it's actually in Kelvins which is the scientific
unit of measure for temperature. In order to convert it into a number that we actually can understand,
OpenWeather Map provides a parameter called units and you can set it to be imperial or metric.
So go ahead and update your URL, your API call, so that you have the temperature getting back in either
metric, Celsius, or imperial, which is Fahrenheit, depending on whichever one you find easier to understand.
All right.
So all we have to do to tag on another parameter is to add another ampersand.
And in this case, the name of the parameter is units.
And remember that when you're adding these parameter names because this is effectively our contract,
the API that we're using to get data from OpenWeather Map, you have to make sure that you're spelling
it exactly the way that is prescribed by them.
Otherwise, they won't know what you're talking about.
So the units, in my case, is going to be equal to metric.
I can understand Fahrenheit.
But now once I put that in, I can see that in London, it's about 9.9 seven degrees,
and that feels just about right. At the moment, we're making this request through our browser.
How can we do the same thing but from our app?
Well, let's get back to our project.
And in the model folder, I'm going to create a new file which I'm going to call the WeatherManager.
So it's going to be a new Swift file and I'm going to name the file WeatherManager. And inside this
brand new file,
we're going to create a struct which is called WeatherManager. And one of the first properties we're
going to create in our WeatherManager is going to be the weatherURL.
And in my case, I'm simply going to copy exactly what I have in my browser at the moment and I'm going
to paste it in here as a string.
Now, the part of this URL that is going to change is going to be this London input because I'm
going to use different cities depending on whatever the user typed in.
So notice how you can actually arrange each of these parameters in the URL in any order you like.
You can have units equals metric, then q equals London, that works, or you could even have the appid
right at the end, like so,
and it would work.
It doesn't actually care about the order. It looks for the keys and gets the values.
So in our case, I'm actually going to get rid of this and "&a=london" because I'm going to add that
programmatically a little bit later on using what the user typed into the UITextField. So I can create
a method in my WeatherManager called fetchWeather, and this takes an input which is going to be the
cityName.
And that's, of course, going to be a string data type. And then inside this method, I'm going to create
the URL string and it's going to be a combination of the base string which is the weatherURL
we've got up here. And then at the very end, I'm going to tag on another ampersand, the "q," which is
the parameter name, the equal sign,
and then in the string interpolation, I'm going to insert the cityName. So now I should be able to go
into my WeatherViewController and create a new weatherManager, and set it equal to a new WeatherManager struct,
and initialize it with a set of parentheses.
And when my textFieldDidEndEditing and before I reset the FextFields.text, I'm going to use the
text in the text field. So I'm going to write let city = searchTextField.text.
And because this property is an optional and I want to actually pass over to my WeatherManager a definite
string, instead of an optional string, I'm going to use an "if let" to optionally unwrap
my searchTextField.text property.
So now my city property is a proper string and I can use it when I call where the weatherManger.fetchWeather
and the cityName is this city that the user has entered.
So now if you want to assure yourself that everything is working, you can actually create a print statement
that prints out the URL string. And when you run the app
and you type in a city name and hit either the search button or the go button, you should see the final
URL that's been formatted together. So you see this entire weatherURL up to here,
metric,
and then we tag on the "&q=Paris" And just as a safety check, we can copy this and paste it into
our browser and check to make sure that it actually works.
Now, all that's left to do is to go across the internet from our app and fetch the actual data back.
And that is something called networking which is what we're going to talk about in the next lesson.
So I'll see you there.